---
author: "Wai-Shing Luk"
title: "Hyperbolic/Elliptic Geometry"
---

# 👋 Introduction

---

## 🔑 Key points

- In Hyperbolic Geometry,

  - two parallel lines meet outside the null circle.

  - Given a line $l$, there are more one parallel lines that pass
    through a point $p$.

- Notations: To distinguish with Euclidean geometry, lines are written
  as capital letters.

---

## Quadrance and Spread in Hyperbolic/Elliptic geometry

- For efficiency, quadrance and spread can also be written as follows.

- The **quadrance** $q(a, b)$ between points $a$ and $b$ is:
  $$q(a, b) \equiv 1 - (a \cdot b^\perp)^2 / (a \cdot a^\perp)(b \cdot b^\perp)$$

- The **spread** $S(L, M)$ between lines $L$ and $M$ is
  $$S(L, M ) \equiv 1 - (L \cdot M^\perp)^2 / (L \cdot L^\perp)(M \cdot M^\perp)$$

- Note: In Hyperbolic Geometry, the quadrance of two points inside the
  null circle is negative.

---

## Relation with Traditional Distance and Angle

- Hyperbolic:
  - Distance: $$q(a, b ) = \sinh^2(d(a, b ) )$$
  - Angle: $$S(L, M ) = \sin^2(\theta(L, M))$$
- Elliptic:
  - Distance: $$q(a, b ) = \sin^2(d(a, b ))$$
  - Angle: $$S(L, M ) = \sin^2(\theta(L, M))$$

---

## Spread Law

$$S_1/q_1 = S_2/q_2 = S_3/q_3.$$

---

## Triple formulate

- Let $a_1$, $a_2$ and $a_3$ are points with $q_1 \equiv q(a_2, a_3)$,
  $q_2 \equiv q(a_1, a_3)$ and $q_3 \equiv q(a_1, a_2)$. Let $L_1$,
  $L_2$ and $L_3$ are lines with $S_1 \equiv S(L_2, L_3)$,
  $S_2 \equiv S(L_1, L_3)$ and $S_3 \equiv S(L_1, L_2)$.

- Theorem (Triple quad formula): If $a_1$, $a_2$ and $a_3$ are
  collinear points then
  $$(q_1 + q_2 + q_3)^2 = 2(q_1^2 + q_2^2 + q_3^2) + 4 q_1 q_2 q_3$$

- Theorem (Triple spread formula): If $L_1$, $L_2$ and $L_3$ are
  concurrent lines then
  $$(S_1 + S_2 + S_3)^2 = 2(S_1^2 + S_2^2 + S_3^2) + 4 S_1 S_2 S_3.$$

---

## Cross Law

- Theorem (Cross law)
  $$(S_1 S_2 q_3 - (S_1 + S_2 + S_3) + 2)^2 = 4(1 - S_1)(1 - S_2)(1 - S_3).$$

- Theorem (Cross dual law)
  $$(q_1 q_2 S_3 - (q_1 + q_2 + q_3) + 2)^2 = 4(1 - q_1)(1 - q_2)(1 - q_3).$$

- Note:
  - Given three quadrances, three spreads can be uniquely
    determined. Same as Euclidean Geometry.
  - Given three spreads, three quadrances can be uniquely
    determined. Not true in Euclidean Geometry.

---

## Right triangles and Pythagoras

- Theorem (Pythagoras): If $L_1$ and $L_2$ are perpendicular lines
  ($S(L_1, L_2) = 1$) then $$q_3 = q_1 + q_2 - q_1 q_2.$$

- Theorem (Thales): Suppose that $\{a_1 a_2 a_3\}$ is a right triangle
  with $S_3 = 1$. Then $S_1 = q_1 / q_3$ and $S_2 = q_2 / q_3$.

---

## Right parallax

- Theorem (Right parallax): If a right triangle $\{a_1 a_2 a_3\}$ has
  spreads $S_1 = 0$, $S_2 = S$ and $S_3 = 1$, then it will have only
  one defined quadrance $q_1 = q$ given by $$q = (S - 1)/S.$$

- We may restate this result in the form: $$S = 1 / (1 - q).$$

---

# Triangle proportions and barycentric coordinates

---

## Triangle proportions

- Theorem (Triangle proportions): Suppose that $d$ is a point lying on
  the line $a_1 a_2$. Define the quadrances $r_1 \equiv q(a_1, d)$ and
  $r_1 \equiv q(a_2, d)$, and the spreads
  $R_1 \equiv S(a_3 a_1, a_3 d)$ and $R_2 \equiv S(a_3 a_2, a_3 d)$.
  Then $$R_1/R_2 = (S_1/S_2)(r_1/r_2) = (q_1/q_2)(r_1/r_2).$$

---

# Q & A 🙋
